Chapter Title: Introduction
Chapter Content: 
Main Section Title: The purpose of this roadmap
Main Section Content: Living with mental illness is a challenge, and often the effects of living with mental health challenges extend to friends and family. A person affected by mental health conditions faces the ups and downs on the road to recovery—from diagnosis and treatment to managing their wellness to balancing work, school and mental health. But more often than not, the journey on that road to recovery can involve parents, siblings, partners, grandparents and children, too. 

Some families can be completely overwhelmed by the experience, while others deny the situation entirely. Many times families are strengthened and unified, which can even extend to the community beyond the family and generate understanding for others who face the road to recovery. 

This “roadmap” is meant to provide families and individuals with mental health conditions help and hope for living in a world affected by mental health challenges, from an overview of symptoms to navigating the health system in the Puget Sound area. People in recovery who live with mental illness and their families can be an influential force that can inspire their communities, fight stigma and transform the state of mental health care. Together, we can advocate for an array of readily available resources designed to meet the diverse needs of persons with mental health conditions and their families.

Section Title: About the affiliate/How can NAMI help?
Section Content: NAMI Seattle is a chapter of the National Alliance on Mental Illness, the nation’s largest grassroots organization that focuses on mental health conditions. 

We are a non-partisan 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization and join hundreds of other NAMI affiliates across the country in fighting discrimination against people with mental health conditions and building a community of hope. We offer free presentations, classes and peer support groups for individuals, families, friends, and providers whose lives are impacted by mental illness. For information on our support groups and groups offered by other organizations and affiliates in the Puget Sound area, visit the NAMI Seattle website at www.namiseattle.org or call 206.783.9264. 

NAMI’s national website, www.nami.org, is a great resource full of information on mental health, treatment resources, and other useful guides for people affected by mental health conditions.

Chapter Title: An Overview of Mental Health Conditions
Main Section Title: An Overview
Main Section Content: In the United States, one in five people will face a mental health condition in their lifetime. Diagnosing mental illness can be a complicated process that can take years, as there is no uniform medical test. Health care providers consult the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) to identify symptoms to diagnose mental health conditions. Treatment varies from illness to illness and person to person, but it is critical to have a good system of care in place and a holistic approach to recovery. 

A note about language: NAMI recognizes that other organizations have drawn distinctions between what diagnoses are considered “mental health conditions” as opposed to “mental illnesses.” We intentionally use the terms “mental health conditions” and “mental illness/es” interchangeably.

Section Title: What is Mental Illness?
Section Content: Mental illnesses are conditions that disrupt a person’s thinking, feeling, mood, ability to relate to others and/or daily functioning. Although we often use the term “mental illness” to refer to all mental health challenges, it is important to remember that this term refers to many different conditions and diagnoses, and that each person’s experience with mental health issues is unique. Preferences range widely about the language we use to talk about those experiences, and many people who use mental health services do not identify with a particular diagnosis.

Section Title: What Causes Mental Illness?
Section Content: Modern science cannot yet pinpoint the cause of mental illness. However, researchers generally agree that multiple factors play a role, rather than a single cause. Mental illnesses have nothing to do with personal weakness or lack of character. Examples of possible factors: “trauma (including generational trauma), genetic predispositions, environment, biochemistry, chronic stress and serious loss.

Section Title: Where Can I Learn More?
Section Content: This guide gives a brief overview of several serious mental health conditions. This is due to space limitations, not because other illnesses are less serious or more important than the ones discussed here. To learn about other illnesses, please visit nami.org/About-Mental-Illness.


Main Section Title: Anxiety Disorders
Main Section Content: Everyone experiences anxiety. Speaking in front of a group makes most of us anxious, but that motivates us to prepare and do well. Driving in heavy traffic is a common source of anxiety, but it keeps us alert and cautious to better avoid accidents. However, when feelings of intense fear and distress are overwhelming and prevent us from doing everyday activities, an anxiety disorder may be the cause. Anxiety disorders are the most common mental health concern in the United States. Over 40 million adults in the U.S. (19.1%) have an anxiety disorder. Meanwhile, approximately 7% of children aged 3-17 experience issues with anxiety each year. Most people develop symptoms before age 21 and women are twice as likely to be diagnosed with an anxiety disorder than men.

Section Title: Common Symptoms
Section Content: Anxiety disorders are a group of related conditions, and each has unique symptoms. However, all anxiety disorders have one thing in common: persistent, excessive fear or worry in situations that are not threatening. People can experience one or more of the following symptoms: 

SubSection Title:Emotional symptoms: 
SubSection Contents::» Feelings of apprehension or dread 
» Feeling tense and jumpy 
» Restlessness or irritability 
» Anticipating the worst and being watchful for signs of danger 

SubSection Title:Physical symptoms: 
SubSection Contents::» Pounding or racing heart and shortness of breath 
» Sweating, tremors and twitches 
» Headaches, fatigue and insomnia 
» Upset stomach, frequent urination or diarrhea

Section Title: Types of Anxiety Disorders
Section Content: Different anxiety disorders have different symptoms. This means that each type of anxiety disorder has its own treatment plan. The most common anxiety disorders include: 

SubSection Title:Panic Disorder 
SubSection Contents: Characterized by panic attacks— sudden feelings of terror— sometimes striking repeatedly and without warning. Often mistaken for a heart attack, a panic attack causes powerful physical symptoms including chest pain, heart palpitations, dizziness, shortness of breath and stomach upset. Many people will go to desperate measures to avoid having an attack, including social isolation. 

SubSection Title:Phobias 
SubSection Contents: Everyone tries to avoid certain things or situations that make us uncomfortable or even fearful. However, for someone with a phobia, certain places, events or objects create powerful reactions of strong, irrational fear. Most people with specific phobias have several things that can trigger those reactions. To avoid panicking, someone with specific phobias will work hard to avoid their triggers. Depending on the type and number of triggers, this fear and the attempt to control it take over a person’s life. 

SubSection Title:Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD) 
SubSection Contents: GAD produces chronic, exaggerated worrying about everyday life. This can consume hours each day, making it hard to concentrate or finish routine daily tasks. A person with GAD may become exhausted by worry and experience headaches, tension or nausea. 

SubSection Title:Social Anxiety Disorder 
SubSection Contents: Unlike shyness, this disorder causes intense fear, often driven by irrational worries about social humiliation such as “saying something stupid,” or “not knowing what to say.” Someone with social anxiety disorder may not take part in conversations, contribute to class discussions, or offer their ideas, and may become isolated. Panic attacks are a common reaction to anticipated or forced social interaction. 

SubSection Title:Other anxiety disorders include: 
SubSection Contents: » Agoraphobia 
» Selective mutism 
» Separation anxiety disorder 
» Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder, involving intoxication or withdrawal or medication treatment 

To learn more about anxiety disorders, their treatment, and resources available through NAMI, visit 
https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Anxiety-Disorders.

Main Section Title: Bipolar Disorder
Main Section Contents: Affecting at least 6 million Americans, bipolar disorder is characterized by dramatic shifts in a person’s mood, energy and ability to think clearly. People with bipolar have high and low moods, known as mania and depression, which differ from the typical ups and downs most people experience. Not everyone’s symptoms are the same and the severity can vary. Because of its irregular patterns, bipolar disorder can be difficult to diagnose. Although bipolar disorder can occur at any point in life, the average age of onset is 25.

Section Title: Common Symptoms
Section Contents:

SubSection Title: Symptoms of mania 
SubSection Contents: » Irritable mood 
» Overconfidence or extremely inflated self-esteem 
» Increased talkativeness 
» Decreased amount of sleep 
» Engaging in risky behavior, such as spending sprees and impulsive sex 
» Racing thoughts, jumping quickly from one idea to another 
» Unpredictable behavior 
» Impaired judgement 

SubSection Title: Symptoms of depression 
SubSection Contents:  » Diminished capacity for pleasure or loss of interest in activities once enjoyed 
» A long period of feeling hopeless, helpless, or low self-esteem 
» Decreased amount of energy, feeling constantly tired 
» Changes in eating, sleeping, or other daily habits 
» Thoughts of death and/or suicide attempts 
» Decision-making feels overwhelming

Section Title: Early Warning Signs of Bipolar Disorder in Children and Teens
Section Contents: Children may experience severe temper tantrums when told “no.” Tantrums can last for hours while the child continues to become more volatile. They may also show odd displays of happy or silly moods and behaviors. A new diagnosis, Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder (DMDD), was added to the DSM 5 in 2014. 

Teenagers may experience a drop in grades, quit sports teams or other activities, be suspended from school or arrested for fighting or drug use, engage in risky sexual behavior or talk about death or even suicide. These kinds of behaviors are worth evaluating with a health care provider.

Main Section Title: Borderline Personality Disorder
Main Section Contents: Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a condition characterized by difficulties in regulating emotion. This difficulty leads to severe, unstable mood swings, impulsivity, instability, poor self-image and stormy personal relationships. People may make repeated attempts to avoid real or imagined situations of abandonment. The combined result of living with BPD can manifest into destructive behavior, such as self-harm (cutting) or suicide attempts. It’s estimated that 1.4% of the adult U.S. population has BPD. Nearly 75% of people diagnosed with BPD are women, but recent research suggests that men may be almost as frequently affected by BPD. In the past, men with BPD were often misdiagnosed with PTSD or depression.

Section Title: Common Symptoms
Section Contents: People with BPD experience wide mood swings and can display a great sense of instability and insecurity. 

SubSection Title: Signs and symptoms may include: 
SubSection Contents: » Frantic efforts to avoid being abandoned by friends and family. 
» Unstable personal relationships that alternate between idealization—“I’m so in love!”— and devaluation—“I hate her.” This is also sometimes known as “splitting.” 
» Distorted and unstable self-image, which affects moods, values, opinions, goals and relationships. 
» Impulsive behaviors that can have dangerous outcomes, such as excessive spending, unsafe sex, substance abuse or reckless driving. 
» Suicidal and self-harming behavior. 
» Periods of intense depressed mood, irritability or anxiety lasting a few hours to a few days. 
» Chronic feelings of boredom or emptiness. 
» Inappropriate, intense or uncontrollable anger—often followed by shame and guilt. 
» Dissociative feelings—disconnecting from your thoughts or sense of identity, or “out of body” type of feelings—and stress-related paranoid thoughts. Severe cases of stress can also lead to brief psychotic episodes. 

Borderline personality disorder is ultimately characterized by the emotional turmoil it causes. People who have it feel emotions intensely for longer periods of time, and it is harder for them to return to a stable baseline after an emotionally intense event. Suicide threats and attempts are very common for people with BPD. Self-harming acts, such as cutting and burning, are also common. 

To learn more about borderline personality disorder, its treatment, and resources available through NAMI, visit https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Borderline-Personality-Disorder.


Main Section Title: Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Main Section Contents: PTSD affects about 9 million Americans. Traumatic events, such as assault, sexual assault, military combat, an accident or a natural disaster, can have long-lasting negative effects. Sometimes our biological responses and instincts, which can be life-saving during a crisis, leave people with ongoing psychological symptoms because they are not integrated into consciousness. Because the body is busy increasing the heart rate, pumping blood to muscles for movement and preparing the body to fight off infection and bleeding in case of a wound, all bodily resources and energy get focused on physically getting out of harm’s way. This resulting damage to the brain’s response system is called posttraumatic stress response or disorder, also known as PTSD.

Section Title: Common Symptoms
Section Contents: 

SubSection Title: The symptoms of PTSD fall into the following categories: 
SubSection Contents: » Intrusive Memories, which can include flashbacks of reliving the moment of trauma, bad dreams and intrusive thoughts. 
» Avoidance, which can include staying away from certain places or objects that are reminders of the traumatic event. 
» Cognitive and mood symptoms, which can include trouble recalling the event and negative thoughts about one’s self. A person may also feel numb, guilty, worried or depressed and have difficulty remembering the traumatic event. Cognitive symptoms can in some instances extend to include out-of-body experiences or feeling that the world is “not real” (derealization). 
» Hypervigilance, which can include being startled very easily, feeling tense, trouble sleeping or outbursts of anger. 

Research on 1–6 year olds found that young children can develop PTSD, and the symptoms are quite different from those of adults. These findings also saw an increase in PTSD diagnoses in young children by more than 8 times when using the newer criteria. 

SubSection Title: Symptoms in young children can include: 
SubSection Contents: » Acting out scary events during playtime 
» Forgetting how/being unable to talk 
» Being excessively clingy with adults 
» Extreme temper tantrums, as well as overly aggressive behavior 
» Developmental achievements in an impacted child might slip back (e.g. reversion to not being toilet trained in a 4-year-old) 

To learn more about post-traumatic stress disorder, its treatment, and resources available through NAMI, visit https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Posttraumatic-Stress-Disorder.

Main Section Title: Depression
Main Section Contents: Depression affects almost 25 million Americans each year. It is more than just feeling sad or going through a rough patch. It’s a serious mental health condition that requires understanding and a good treatment plan. With early detection, diagnosis and a treatment plan consisting of medication, psychotherapy and lifestyle choices, many people can get better at managing their symptoms. People with depression often experience periods of wellness that alternate with periods of illness. Without treatment, episodes may last a few months to several years. People with severe depression can feel so hopeless that they become at risk for suicide. Just like with any mental health condition, people with depression or those who are going through a depressive episode (also known as major or clinical depression) experience symptoms differently. But for most people, depression changes how they function day-to-day.

Section Title: Common Symptoms
Section Contents: 

SubSection Title: Symptoms may include:
SubSection Contents: » Changes in sleep 
» Changes in appetite 
» Lack of concentration 
» Loss of energy and ability to perform daily routines 
» Lack of interest in activities the person used to enjoy 
» Low self esteem. During periods of depression, people dwell on losses or failures and feel excessive guilt and helplessness 
» Hopelessness. Depression can make a person feel that nothing good will ever happen. Physical aches and pains. Instead of talking about their emotions or sadness, some people may complain about a headache or an upset stomach. 
» Suicidal thoughts 
» Changes in movement (less activity or agitation) 

How a person describes the symptoms of depression often depends on the cultural lens they are looking through. In Western cultures, people generally talk about their moods or feelings, whereas in many Eastern cultures, people may refer more often to physical pain.

Main Section Title: Types of Depressive Disorders: Major Depressive Disorder with a Seasonal Pattern
Section Contents: Major Depressive Disorder with a Seasonal Pattern (formerly known as seasonal affective disorder, or SAD) is characterized by recurrent episodes of depression in late fall and winter, alternating with periods of normal mood the rest of the year. Researchers at the National Institute of Mental Health were the first to suggest this condition was the result of decreased light and experimented with the use of bright light to address the symptoms. Research has shown that people who experience this disorder may not have optimal levels of a working neurotransmitter known as serotonin. 

The prevalence of this condition appears to vary with latitude, age and sex: 
» Prevalence increases among people living in higher/northern latitudes. 
» Younger persons are at higher risk. 
» Women are more likely than men to experience this condition.


Section Title: Symptoms
Section Contents: This disorder’s most common presentation is atypical of depression. With Major Depressive Disorder with a Seasonal Pattern people tend to gain weight and sleep more. Although not everyone experiences all the following symptoms, the classic…

SubSection Title: Characteristics of Major Depressive Disorder with a Seasonal Pattern include:
SubSection Contents: » Hypersomnia (or oversleeping) 
» Daytime fatigue 
» Decreased sexual interest 
» Lethargy 
» Hopelessness 
» Suicidal thoughts 
» Lack of interest in usual activities and decreased socialization

Section Title: Diagnosis
Section Contents: The key to an accurate diagnosis of this condition is recognizing its pattern. Symptoms usually begin in October/November and subside in March/April. Some people begin to experience a “slump” as early as August, while others remain well until January. Regardless of the time of onset, most people don’t feel fully “back to normal” until early May. 

For a diagnosis to be made, this pattern of onset and remission must have occurred during at least a two-year period, without the occurrence of any non-seasonal episodes during that same period. 

This means you will not receive this diagnosis the first time you experience symptoms. If you believe you may have a seasonal depressive pattern, it’s important to pay attention to the pattern. Track your symptoms, noting when they begin and when they subside. Mental health professionals will ask you about your observations and also your family history since mood disorders tend to run in families.

Section Title: Treatment
Section Content: As with most depressive disorders, the best treatment includes a combination of antidepressant medications, cognitive behavioral therapy and exercise. Unlike other depressive disorders, this condition can also be treated with light therapy. Light therapy consists of regular, daily exposure to a “light box” (also known as a “happy light”), which artificially simulates high-intensity sunlight. Be aware that ordinary indoor light is not sufficient to treat this condition. 

Some primary care doctors have experience treating this disorder. Remember that this condition is a subset of major depression. If your primary care doctor prescribes you an antidepressant, orders you a light box and sends you to a social worker—and you have trouble the following year—consider seeking consultation from a psychiatrist. Treatment planning needs to match the severity of the condition for each individual. 

For more information on MDD with a Seasonal Pattern, visit https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Depression/Major-Depressive-Disorder-with-a-Seasonal-Pattern.


Main Section Title: Types of Depressive Disorders: Major Depressive Disorder with a Peripartum Onset
Main Section Content: Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) with Peripartum Onset (also known as postpartum depression) is different from a temporary mood disturbance after childbirth. Up to 6% of pregnant people will experience a major depressive episode during pregnancy or in the first year following delivery. It is also estimated that 50% of all MDD episodes actually begin prior to delivery or postpartum. For this reason, all episodes are referred to collectively as “peripartum.” 

Any child-bearing person can experience postpartum depression and it has no relationship to a person’s capacity to be a good parent. With treatment, they can feel better.

Section Title: Symptoms
Section Contents: 
SubSection Title: Symptoms can present themselves differently depending on the person but some of the most common symptoms include:
SubSection Contents: » Extreme difficulty in day-to-day functioning 
» Feelings of guilt, anxiety and fear 
» Loss of pleasure in life 
» Insomnia 
» Bouts of crying 
» Thoughts of hurting oneself or the infant 

Psychotic symptoms in the peripartum timeframe are less common after childbirth and are characterized by seeing things that don’t exist, confusion, rapid mood swings and thoughts of harming oneself or the infant. These symptoms only occur in about 1 of every 1,000 births. People who have bipolar disorder or schizoaffective disorder are at increased risk of having psychotic symptoms, but they can also occur in women with no prior history of these disorders

Section Title: Causes
Section Contents: Previous depressive episodes and/or a family history of depression, lack of social support, anxiety, marriage or money problems, stress and substance use disorders are risk factors for MDD with Peripartum Onset. The risk of developing symptoms of depression has also been associated with being a stay-at-home parent and unwanted pregnancy. 

People who have experienced one episode of postpartum depression have an increased chance of experiencing it again. Preparing with your doctor for onset can make a significant difference in many cases.

Section Title: Diagnosis
Section Contents: One of the criteria used to diagnose depression is appetite change. However, appetite change may not be suitable for the diagnosis of depression in the perinatal period, five months before and one month after giving birth. 

Dramatic hormone changes—like those that happen during the perinatal period—can replicate symptoms of depression. During pregnancy, estrogen and progesterone levels increase. In the first 24 hours after childbirth, these hormone levels abruptly return to normal. Thyroid hormones may also decrease after childbirth. A blood test can determine if thyroid/hormone levels are abnormal.

Section Title: Treatment
Section Contents: The key to recovery is to seek help as soon as symptoms are recognized. Treatment plans vary by individual and can include options such as individual, family or group psychotherapy and medication.

Section Title: Resources
Section Contents: Studies suggest that people who experience postpartum depression have often had earlier episodes of depression that were not diagnosed or treated. If you have experienced an episode of depression and are planning to become pregnant, you can reduce your risk and improve your outcomes by consulting your doctor. Talk with your obstetrician or primary care provider about whether they can help you—if not, a mental health professional can be of help. Local academic departments of psychiatry also often have resources in this field. For more information on MDD with a Peripartum Onset, visit https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Depression/Major-Depressive-Disorder-with-Peripartum-Onset.

Main Section Title: Schizoaffective Disorder
Main Section Contents: Schizoaffective disorder is characterized primarily by symptoms of schizophrenia, such as hallucinations or delusions, and symptoms of a mood disorder, such as mania and depression. Reading about schizophrenia and bipolar disorder will offer many overlapping resources for schizoaffective disorder. Because schizoaffective disorder is less well-studied than the other two conditions, many interventions are borrowed from their treatment approaches. 

Many people with schizoaffective disorder are often incorrectly diagnosed at first with bipolar disorder or schizophrenia because it shares symptoms of multiple mental health conditions.

Section Title: Common Symptoms
Section Contents: 
SubSection Title: Common Symptoms Include:
SubSection Contents: Hallucinations, which are seeing or hearing things that aren’t there. 
» Delusions—which are false, fixed beliefs that are held regardless of contradictory evidence. 
» Disorganized thinking. A person may switch very quickly from one topic to another or provide answers that are completely unrelated. 
» Depressed mood. If a person has been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder depressive type they will experience feelings of sadness, emptiness, feelings of worthlessness or other symptoms of depression. 
» Manic behavior. If a person has been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder: bipolar type they will experience feelings of euphoria, racing thoughts, increased risky behavior and other symptoms of mania. 

To learn more about schizoaffective disorder, its treatment, and resources available through NAMI, visit https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Schizoaffective-Disorder.

Main Section Title: Schizophrenia
Main Section Contents: Schizophrenia is a serious mental illness that interferes with a person’s ability to think clearly, manage emotions, make decisions and relate to others. It is a complex, long-term medical illness. Although schizophrenia can occur at any age, the average age of onset tends to be in the late teens to the early 20s for men, and the late 20s to early 30s for women. It is uncommon for schizophrenia to be diagnosed in a person younger than 12 or older than 40. It is possible to live well with schizophrenia. 

It can be difficult to diagnose schizophrenia in teens. This is because the first signs can include a change of friends, a drop in grades, sleep problems, and irritability—common and nonspecific adolescent behavior. Other factors include isolating oneself and withdrawing from others, an increase in unusual thoughts and suspicions, and a family history of psychosis. This period is known as the “prodrome” or “prodromal” stage and most people with schizophrenia will have experienced this stage prior to the onset of a psychotic episode. Understanding the schizophrenia prodrome (nih.gov)

Section Title: Common Symptoms
Section Contents: 
SubSection Title: Common Symptoms Include:
SubSection Contents: » Hallucinations. These include a person hearing voices, seeing things, or smelling things others can’t perceive. The hallucination is very real to the person experiencing it, and it may be very confusing for a loved one to witness. The voices in the hallucination can be critical or threatening. Voices may involve people that are known or unknown to the person hearing them. 
» Delusions. These are false beliefs that don’t change even when the person who holds them is presented with new ideas or facts. People who have delusions often also have problems concentrating, confused thinking, or the sense that their thoughts are blocked. 
» Negative symptoms are ones that diminish a person’s abilities. Negative symptoms often include being emotionally flat or speaking in a dull, disconnected way. People with the negative symptoms may be unable to start or follow through with activities, show little interest in life, or sustain relationships. Negative symptoms are sometimes confused with clinical depression. 

To learn more about schizophrenia, its treatment, and resources available through NAMI, visit https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Schizophrenia.

Main Section Title: Psychosis
Main Section Contents: 

Section Title: What is Psychosis?
Section Contents: Psychosis is a symptom, not an illness, and it is more common than you may think. In the U.S., approximately 100,000 young people experience psychosis each year. As many as three in 100 people will have an episode at some point in their lives. 

Early or first-episode psychosis (FEP) refers to when a person first shows signs of beginning to lose contact with reality. Acting quickly to connect a person with the right treatment during early psychosis or FEP can be life-changing and radically alter that person’s future. 

Most people think of psychosis as a break with reality. In a way it is. Psychosis is characterized as disruptions to a person’s thoughts and perceptions that make it difficult for them to recognize what is real and what isn’t. These disruptions are often experienced as seeing, hearing and believing things that aren’t real or having strange, persistent thoughts, behaviors and emotions. While everyone’s experience is different, most people say psychosis is frightening and confusing.

Section Title: Identifying Psychosis
Section Contents: Early psychosis rarely comes suddenly. Usually, a person has gradual, non-specific changes in thoughts and perceptions, but doesn’t understand what’s going on. Early warning signs can be difficult to distinguish from typical teen or young adult behavior. While such signs should not be cause for alarm, they may indicate the need to get an assessment from a doctor. 

Encouraging people to seek help for early psychosis is important. Families are often the first to see early signs of psychosis and the first to address the issue of seeking treatment. However, a person’s willingness to accept help is often complicated by delusions, fears, stigma and feeling unsettled. In this case, families can find the situation extremely difficult, but there are engagement strategies to help encourage a person to seek help. 

It’s important to get help quickly since early treatment provides the best hope of recovery by slowing or stopping psychosis.



SubSection Title: Early warning signs include the following
SubSection Contents: » A worrisome drop in grades or job performance 
» Trouble thinking clearly or concentrating 
» Suspiciousness or uneasiness with others 
» A decline in self-care or personal hygiene 
» Spending a lot more time alone than usual » Strong, inappropriate emotions or having no feelings at all

Section Title: Types of Psychosis
Section Contents: Psychosis includes a range of symptoms but typically involves one of these two major experiences: 
SubSection Title: 
Hallucinations are seeing, hearing or feeling things that aren’t there, such as the following: 
SubSection Contents:  » Hearing voices (auditory hallucinations) 
» Strange sensations or unexplainable feelings 
» Seeing glimpses of objects or people that are not there or distortions. 

SubSection Title: Delusions are strong beliefs that are not consistent with the person’s culture, are unlikely to be true and may seem irrational to others, such as the following: 
SubSection Contents: » Believing that you are being spied on, poisoned, or that others are plotting against you. 
» Believing external forces are controlling thoughts, feelings and behaviors 
» Believing that trivial remarks, events or objects have personal meaning or significance 
» Thinking you have special powers, are on a special mission or that you are a very powerful/famous person. (Grandiose delusion)

Section Title: Causes of Psychosis
Section Contents: Some people are genetically vulnerable to developing psychosis or conditions that include psychosis (e.g. schizophrenia). However, not everyone with a genetic risk develops psychosis unless they experience a major stressor or trauma which can trigger the development of psychosis. 

SubSection Title: Genetics.
SubSection Contents: Many genes can contribute to the development of psychosis, but just because a person has a gene doesn’t mean they will experience psychosis. Ongoing studies will help us better understand which genes play a role in psychosis. (After Genes and Trauma we could add in the stress diathesis explanation of their relation) 

SubSection Title: Trauma. 
SubSection Contents: A traumatic event such as a death, war or sexual assault can trigger a psychotic episode. The type of trauma—and a person’s age—affects whether a traumatic event will result in psychosis. 

SubSection Title: Substance use.
SubSection Contents: The use of marijuana, LSD, amphetamines and other substances can increase the risk of psychosis in people who are already vulnerable. 

SubSection Title:   Physical illness or injury. 
SubSection Contents: Traumatic brain injuries, brain tumors, strokes, HIV and some brain diseases such as Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s and dementia can sometimes cause psychosis. 

SubSection Title:    Mental health conditions. 
SubSection Contents: Sometimes psychosis is a symptom of a condition like schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder or depression. 

To learn more about psychosis, its treatment, and resources available through NAMI, visit https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Psychosis.

Main Section Title: Dissociative Disorders
Main Section Content: Dissociative disorders are defined by an involuntary escape from reality characterized by a disconnection between thoughts, identity, consciousness and memory. People from all age groups and racial, ethnic and socioeconomic backgrounds can experience a dissociative disorder. 

Up to 75% of people experience at least one dissociative episode in their lives, with only 2% meeting the full criteria for chronic episodes. Women are more likely than men to be diagnosed with a dissociative disorder. 

The symptoms of a dissociative disorder usually first develop as a response to a traumatic event, such as abuse or military combat. Stressful situations can worsen symptoms and cause problems with functioning in everyday activities. However, the symptoms a person experiences will depend on the type of dissociative disorder that a person has. 

Treatment for dissociative disorders often involves psychotherapy and medication. Though finding an effective treatment plan can be difficult, many people are able to live healthy and productive lives.

Section Title: Symptoms
Section Content:
SubSection Title: Symptoms and signs of dissociative disorders include: 
SubSection Content: » Significant memory loss of specific times, people and events 
» Out-of-body experiences, such as feeling as though you are watching a movie of yourself 
» Co-occuring mental health symptoms such as depression, anxiety and thoughts of suicide » A sense of detachment from your emotions, or emotional numbness 
» A lack of a sense of self-identity 

The symptoms of dissociative disorders depend on the type of disorder that has been diagnosed. There are three types of dissociative disorders defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM): 

SubSection Title: Dissociative Amnesia 
SubSection Contents: The main symptom is difficulty remembering important information about one’s self. Dissociative amnesia may surround a particular event, such as combat or abuse, or more rarely, information about identity and life history. The onset for an amnesic episode is usually sudden, and an episode can last minutes, hours, days, or, rarely, months or years. There is no average for age onset or percentage, and a person may experience multiple episodes throughout their life. 

SubSection Title: Depersonalization disorder 
SubSection Contents: This disorder involves ongoing feelings of detachment from actions, feelings, thoughts and sensations as if someone is watching a movie of themselves (depersonalization). Sometimes other people and things may feel like they are unreal (derealization). A person may experience depersonalization, derealization or both. Symptoms can last just a matter of moments or return at times over the years. The average onset age is 16, although depersonalization episodes can start anywhere from early to mid childhood. Less than 20% of people with this disorder start experiencing episodes after the age of 20. 

SubSection Title: Dissociative identity disorder
SubSection Contents: Formerly known as multiple personality disorder, this disorder is characterized by alternating between multiple identities. A person may feel like one or more voices are trying to take control in their head. Often these identities may have unique names, characteristics, mannerisms and voices. People with DID will experience gaps in memory of everyday events, personal information and trauma. Women are more likely to be diagnosed, as they more frequently present with acute dissociative symptoms. Men are more likely to deny symptoms and trauma histories, and commonly exhibit more violent behavior, rather than amnesia or fugue states. This can lead to elevated false negative diagnosis. 

To learn more about dissociative disorders, their treatment, and resources available through NAMI, visit https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Dissociative-Disorders.


Main Section Title: Eating Disorders
Main Section Content: When you become so preoccupied with food and/or weight that you find it harder to focus on other aspects of your life, it may be an early sign of an eating disorder. Without treatment, eating disorders can take over a person’s life and lead to serious, potentially fatal medical complications. Eating disorders can affect people of any age or gender, but rates are higher among women. Symptoms commonly appear in adolescence and young adulthood.

Section Title: Symptoms
Section Content: Eating disorders are a group of related conditions that cause serious emotional and physical problems. Each condition involves extreme food and/or weight issues; however, each has unique symptoms that separate it from the others. These are three of the most common types of eating disorders, but there are other types as well. 

SubSection Title: Anorexia Nervosa 
SubSection Contents: People with anorexia will deny themselves food to the point of self-starvation as they obsess about weight loss. With anorexia, a person will deny hunger and refuse to eat, practice binge eating and purging behaviors or exercise to the point of exhaustion as they attempt to limit, eliminate or “burn” calories. The emotional symptoms of anorexia include irritability, social withdrawal, lack of mood or emotion, inability to understand the seriousness of the situation, fear of eating in public and obsessions with food and exercise. Often food rituals are developed or whole categories of food are eliminated from the person’s diet, out of fear of being “fat”. Anorexia can take a heavy physical toll. Very low food intake and inadequate nutrition can cause a person to become malnourished and severely underweight. The body is forced to slow down to conserve energy, causing irregularities or loss of menstruation, constipation and abdominal pain, irregular heart rhythms, low blood pressure, dehydration and trouble sleeping. Some people with anorexia might also use binge eating and purge behaviors, while others only restrict eating. 

SubSection Title: Bulimia Nervosa
SubSection Contents: People living with bulimia will feel out of control when binging on very large amounts of food during short periods of time, and then desperately try to rid themselves of the extra calories using forced vomiting, abusing laxatives or excessive exercise. This becomes a repeating cycle that controls many aspects of the person’s life and has a very negative effect both emotionally and physically. The emotional symptoms of bulimia include low self-esteem overly linked to body image, feelings of being out of control, feeling guilty or shameful about eating and withdrawal from friends and family. Like anorexia, bulimia will inflict physical damage. The binging and purging can severely harm the parts of the body involved in eating and digesting food, teeth are damaged by frequent vomiting, and acid reflux is common. Excessive purging can cause dehydration that affects the body’s electrolytes and can lead to cardiac arrhythmias, heart failure and even death. 

SubSection Title: Binge Eating Disorder (BED) 
SubSection Contents: A person with BED loses control over their eating and eats a very large amount of food in a short period of time. They may also eat large amounts of food even when they aren’t hungry or after they are uncomfortably full. This causes them to feel embarrassed, disgusted, depressed or guilty about their behavior. A person with BED, after an episode of binge eating, does not attempt to purge or exercise excessively like someone living with anorexia or bulimia would. 

To learn more about eating disorders, their treatment, and resources available through NAMI, visit https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Eating-Disorders.


Main Section Title: Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Main Section Content: Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by repetitive, unwanted, intrusive thoughts (obsessions) and irrational, excessive urges to do certain actions (compulsions). Although people with OCD may know that their thoughts and behavior don’t make sense, they are often unable to stop them. Symptoms typically begin during childhood, the teenage years or young adulthood, although males often develop them at a younger age than females. 1.2% of U.S. adults experience OCD each year. 

Most people have occasional obsessive thoughts or compulsive behaviors. In an obsessive-compulsive disorder; however, these symptoms generally last more than an hour each day and interfere with daily life. 

Section Title: Obsessions
Section Content: Obsessions are intrusive, irrational thoughts or impulses that repeatedly occur. People with these disorders know these thoughts are irrational but are afraid that somehow they might be true. These thoughts and impulses are upsetting, and people may try to ignore or suppress them. 

SubSection Title: Examples of obsessions include: 
SubSection Content: » Thoughts about harming or having harmed someone 
» Doubts about having done something right, like turning off the stove or locking a door 
» Unpleasant sexual images 
» Fears of saying or shouting inappropriate things in public 

Section Title: Compulsions
Section Content: Compulsions are repetitive acts that temporarily relieve the stress brought on by an obsession. People with these disorders know that these rituals don’t make sense but feel they must perform them to relieve the anxiety and, in some cases, to prevent something bad from happening. Like obsessions, people may try not to perform compulsive acts but feel forced to do so to relieve anxiety. 

SubSection Title: Examples of compulsions include: 
SubSection Content: » Hand washing due to a fear of germs 
» Counting and recounting money because a person can’t be sure they added correctly 
» Checking to see if a door is locked or the stove is off 
» “Mental checking” that goes with intrusive thoughts is also a form of compulsion 

To learn more about OCD, its treatment, and resources available through NAMI, visit https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Obsessive-compulsive-Disorder.


Chapter Title: Treatment and Recovery
Chapter Content: 
Main Section Title: What is recovery?
Main Section Content: Recovery is often a lifelong wellness plan when someone is living with mental illness. Treatment can include diet and exercise, work, sleep, mental health and an overall treatment plan. Evidence-based medications, therapy and psychosocial services such as psychiatric rehabilitation, housing, employment and peer supports have made wellness and recovery a reality for people living with mental health conditions. 

Choosing the right mix of treatments and supports that work for you or your family member is an important step in the recovery process. Treatment choices for mental health conditions will vary from person to person. Even people with the same diagnosis will have different experiences, needs, goals and objectives for treatment. There is no “one size fits all” treatment. When people are directly involved in designing their own treatment plan, including defining recovery and wellness goals, choosing services that support them and evaluating treatment decisions and progress, the experience of care and outcomes are improved. 

There are many tools that can improve the experience on the road to wellness including medication, counseling (therapy), social support and education. Therapy, for example, can take many forms, from learning relaxation skills to intensively reworking your thinking patterns. Social support, acceptance and encouragement from friends, family and others can also make a difference. Education about how to manage a mental health condition along with other medical conditions can provide the skills and supports to enrich the unique journey toward overall recovery and wellness. Together with a treatment team you can develop a well-rounded and integrated recovery plan that may include counseling, medications, support groups, education programs and other strategies that could work for you or your loved one. 

Recovery is also a mindset. It requires dedication and discipline as well as support from family, loved ones, and/or friends. Everyone can craft the recovery journey differently. Research shows that a variety of approaches to treatment and recovery can work. It is up to the individual living with mental illness and their treatment team whether those approaches include medication, therapy, supplements, meditation or other types of alternative therapy.


Main Section Title: The Elements of Recovery
Main Section Contents: Looking at an array of research, models and experience, NAMI believes there are core elements to recovery. William Anthony, director of the Boston Center for Psychiatric Rehabilitation, developed the recovery model in 1993. Anthony believed, “Recovery is a deeply personal, unique process of changing one’s attitudes, values, feelings, goals, skills and/or roles. It is a way of living a satisfying, hopeful, and contributing life even with limitations caused by the illness. Recovery involves the development of new meaning and purpose in one’s life as one grows beyond the effects of mental illness.” The elements of recovery may include:

Section Title: 1. ACCEPTANCE

Section Contents:Acceptance that you or a loved one has mental illness is often the most difficult hurdle in recovery. When individuals or family members first hear that they or someone they love has a diagnosis, they frequently find themselves experiencing a wide range of emotions including denial, fear, relief, embarrassment, guilt, frustration. With a diagnosis, you start to wonder what life will look like from now on, and that can be daunting. Acceptance can come immediately or it can take a long time. Once acceptance has been reached, you can then make plans based on the diagnosis, and the individual with a mental illness and their family can better map out specific options.


Section Title: 2. HOPE

Section Contents: Individuals with mental illness must believe that there is hope for recovery. Those who have previous episodes of mental illnesses can look back and realize that because they recovered once, they can do it again. Those who are experiencing an episode for the first time can gain much by having contact with other people who have been through it before and can share their experiences and journey.


Section Title: 3. MEDICATION

Section Contents: Finding the right medication that works – with side effects that are minimal or absent – can be tricky and extremely stressful. If you can find a good fit, medications can be important to your recovery process. Some people may work toward being medication-free, and others may need to change medications many times over the course of their mental health journey.


Section Title: 4. TREATMENT
Section Contents: Mental health care providers are valuable to recovery. Whether they are a psychiatrist, psychologist, counselor, or therapist these professionals can provide a safe environment to discuss symptoms and issues related to mental illness and receive support.



Section Title: 5. HOUSING

Section Contents: Stable, safe and affordable housing is one of the most crucial elements of recovery. Sometimes, housing can further recovery by enhancing autonomy and preventing future hospitalizations.

Section Title: 6. FAMILY SUPPORT

Section Contents: For most families, confronting a loved one’s mental illness is very difficult. Fortunately, there are numerous resources available to help families. Families can learn coping and stress reduction techniques to assist both their loved ones and themselves in specialized support programs, such as NAMI’s Family-to-Family program. Family-to-Family is a designated evidence-based program aimed at family members, significant others and friends of people living with mental illness. The free program consists of 8 weekly sessions and is taught by trained volunteers who have completed a 26-hour intensive workshop. Also available in Spanish as De Familia a Familia. Check www.nami.org to see if your local NAMI offers NAMI Family to Family or De Familia a Familia de NAMI.


Section Title: 7. PEER SUPPORT AND RELATIONSHIPS

Section Contents: Peer support provides a person experiencing mental illness with the strength, hope and wisdom others have gained through recovery. Individuals share what has worked for them in overcoming the impact that a mental health condition has had on their lives. There is a level of community and comfort connecting with people who share your situation—in this case, recovering from a mental health condition. NAMI’s Peer-to-Peer is an eight-week program, taught by trained individuals who are living well in recovery from their own mental illnesses. Check for NAMI Peer-to-Peer near you at www.nami.org.


Section Title: 8. RESILIENCY
Section Contents: Resiliency is the ability to recover from, overcome or “bounce forward” from hardship, misfortune, change or shock. Whether experiencing an episode for the first time or experiencing a repeat episode, individuals often lose hope, thinking that they will never be themselves again. Resiliency is the ability to remain flexible and hold onto life, while not catastrophizing or overanalyzing changing conditions. It is about having hope that the future can offer something better or different. Resiliency is learned through insight, adversity, creativity, humor, morality, taking initiative and relationships with others.


Section Title: 9. MEANINGFUL ACTIVITY AND/OR WORK

Section Contents: Working or hobbies can provide opportunities to regain a positive identity, including a sense of purpose and value. It can provide both financial benefits and psychological benefits that can contribute greatly to the recovery process.



Section Title: 10. COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT
Section Contents: Individuals recover more quickly if they are active in their communities. Ideally, communities will have created programs to assist in maintaining an individual’s social integration and affiliation with the community. Joining a church or social group and volunteering can be great opportunities to be active in your community and to make friends.

Section Title: 11. EDUCATION AND KNOWLEDGE
Section Contents: It is very important to learn about your own or your loved one’s mental illness. The more information you have, the better you can move toward recovery. Knowing the ins and outs of the mental health system helps to better navigate the system. There are countless sources of information available on mental health, from the web (mentalhealth.gov, www.nimh.nih.gov and nami.org are great resources), to your local library, NAMI affiliate or your healthcare provider’s office. Schools, community centers and churches also sometimes have groups, counselors and activities around mental health. You can always call or text the NAMI HelpLine at 800-950-6264 or email at info@nami.org for a wealth of information.

Section Title: 12. EMPOWERMENT
Section Contents: Empowerment is defined as having the means, opportunities and authority to take personal responsibility for attaining one’s objectives. As individuals begin their recoveries, they begin to see that they don’t need to be passive observers of events and decisions in their lives; they begin to learn that they can have a say in what affects them.


Section Title: 13. SELF-ADVOCACY
Section Contents: This element naturally follows empowerment. People can ask for what they want, say yes or no and can freely change their minds. They can have choices in their lives. They can follow their own values, standards and spiritual beliefs. This element is based on the concept of taking personal responsibility in the recovery process.


Section Title: 14. ACCESSES TO RESOURCES
Section Contents: Access to resources is the ability to make contact with various people and places and to use products, services, and technologies that promote recovery. People can research mental health services online and call for information. In Washington State, each of the Behavioral Health Networks (BHN) can be contacted for information. Local mental health clinics have information available. NAMI Seattle hosts a person-to-person information and referral line, available during business hours, at (425) 298-5315. Questions are answered by a knowledgeable person who can direct you where to get the help.


Section Title: 15. COPING SKILLS
Section Contents: Coping skills enable everyone to reduce stress. These skills vary case by case and person to person, but can include taking medications as prescribed, keeping appointments with service providers, deep breathing exercises, eating properly and getting enough sleep.


Section Title: 16. SPIRITUALITY

Section Contents: A broad definition of spirituality is: a partnership with one’s higher power. For many individuals, spirituality provides hope, solace during illness, peace, understanding, community and can contribute much on the road to recovery.

Main Section Title: What does support from family members look like?
Main Section Content: When someone has a mental health condition, support from family can make a big difference. However, it may be hard for family members to know what approach is best. It’s particularly difficult to balance showing support with caring for their own health and encouraging others to be responsible for their actions.

Section Title: Remember: You’re in the Process of Learning
Section Contents: Helping a family member can be difficult, even if you do everything “right.” No book, therapist or website can tell you how to prepare for the situations that may arise. It helps to think of this experience as a learning process. Every person with a mental health condition experiences it slightly differently. One person may fear losing a job, while another may be more worried about how relationships will change. If you ask questions and listen to the answers, you can learn about your family member’s unique concerns. 

You can also acquire better skills for offering support. If you come from a family that’s uncomfortable talking about mental illness or emotions you can try to change this. Similarly, even if you feel like you don’t know how to offer encouragement right now, you can develop and improve through practice.


Section Title: Support is Not Control
Section Contents: We can support and encourage our family members; however, we can’t make treatment decisions for them. We should offer suggestions and input, but be ready to accept and support their decisions. 

They may not choose the same treatment options we would, but by acknowledging their right to decide, we create a respectful, healing environment within the family. We improve their immediate quality of life by treating them with respect by supporting them through the decisions they decide to make. 

The reality is that we can only control our own actions. We have to learn to give the people around us responsibility for decisions that only they can make. It’s ultimately up to them to decide on their goals and strategies. You can encourage your family members, but you must let go of the feeling that you have to solve their problems for them.


Section Title: Tips on Being Supportive
Section Contents: One of the most important ways to support a family member is to maintain our own mental health. The healthier we are, the more energy we have for offering encouragement. We can then offer practical support, such as the following: 

SubSection Title:
SubSection Contents: »  Learn as much as possible about mental health and your family member’s condition. Knowledge gives you practical insight and understanding. Learn about available treatments. What therapies and medications can help? 
» Show interest in your family member’s treatment plan. Doctors and other medical providers cannot talk to family members without a patient’s permission, so ask your family member if they are interested in allowing this permission. Talk to the medical team about what to expect from the treatment plan. In particular, ask about possible side effects of medication. Find out how to call the provider if you notice behavioral or emotional changes you’re concerned about. 
» Encourage your family member to follow their treatment plan. This might mean offering transportation to therapy sessions, or reminders to take medications as prescribed. Because daily prodding about medication can be insulting to a person, handle this carefully. Talk to your family member about preferences. Try to set up a simple system to ensure that recovery is on track. 
» Strive for an atmosphere of cooperation, which means communicating with everyone in the family and distributing responsibility equally. Assign everyone in the household roles to play according to their abilities. Include your family member with the illness as well, making their responsibilities clear. 
» Listen carefully. Simply listening is one of the best ways to show your support. If your family member says hurtful things, it helps to listen for the emotion behind the words rather than focusing on the words themselves. Try to recognize and acknowledge the pain, anxiety or confusion rather than getting into unnecessary arguments. 
» Resume “normal” activities and routines. Don’t let life revolve around your family member’s mental health condition. Return to a regular routine within the family. Spend time together on activities unconnected from illness, such as watching a movie, going to a restaurant or visiting a park. Practice living life with a mental health condition, rather than struggling against mental illness. 
» Don’t push too hard. At the same time, remember that it takes time to heal from an acute episode. Allow your family member to rest. Offer them opportunities to ease back into routine activities rather than requiring participation. A gentle approach encourages recuperation. 
» Find support. Outside support and encouragement is critical for everyone in the family, not only the person with the mental health condition. Whatever your role in the family, stress is easier to handle when you regularly talk to people who understand your experience. Peer-led support groups are available for people living with mental illnesses and also for their family members.
» Express your support out loud. Spoken encouragement can reduce stress levels. You don’t need to say anything fancy. Practice a few simple, gentle statements: “I’m sorry you feel bad and I want to help,” “It isn’t your fault. It’s an illness that can happen to anyone,” “How can I best support you?,” “What do you need from me?” 
» Keep family members and yourself physically and emotionally safe. A caring, compassionate, and supportive environment helps in recovery. If there is abuse in the family, such as violence or emotional abuse, seeking help, such as individual or family therapy, may help improve dynamics. 
» Prepare a crisis plan that includes important phone numbers such as the local crisis intervention team. Include your family member in the planning of this document. Make everyone in the family aware of what they should do in case of an emergency. 
» Don’t give up. A person with a mental health condition benefits enormously from having social support. Remind your family member that you’re there to help and you’re not giving up. When setbacks occur with one treatment strategy, look for alternative strategies. Try something new, and encourage your family member not to give up. A good life is possible.


Main Section Title: Mental health resources for veterans and service members
Main Section Contents: According to a 2014 study in JAMA Psychiatry, nearly 1 in 4 active duty members showed signs of a mental health condition. There are three primary mental health concerns that you may encounter serving in the military: 
» Postraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). Traumatic events, such as military combat, assault, disasters or sexual assault can have long-lasting negative effects such as trouble sleeping, anger, nightmares, being jumpy and alcohol and drug abuse. When these troubles don’t go away, it could be PTSD. The 2014 JAMA Psychiatry study found the rate of PTSD to be 15 times higher than civilians. 
» Depression. It is more than just experiencing sadness, depression interferes with daily life and normal functioning and may require treatment. 
» Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI). A traumatic brain injury is usually the result of a significant blow to the head or body. Symptoms can include headaches, fatigue or drowsiness, memory problems, mood changes and mood swings.

Section Title: Active Duty: Who Should I tell?
Section Contents: Service members work better together when they and their fellow service members are experiencing good mental and physical health. If you’re concerned about a possible mental health condition—or if you enter the armed forces with a past or present mental health condition— know that the armed forces does not require service members to disclose mental health problems to their chain of command. The responsibility for deciding whether to disclose your condition does fall on the medical officers and care providers you consult. They receive training on military policies concerning the confidentiality of protected health information (PHI). Here are some people to consider speaking with: 

» Confidential counselors are available for service members and their families through Military One Source at 1-800-342-9647. If you’re unsure whether to seek treatment or if you know someone who might need treatment, they are an excellent first stop for information and advice. 
» Primary care providers can be helpful for discussing concerns and treatment options. 
» Behavioral health care providers working at primary care clinics are available on many military bases so you can seek a specialist’s advice without leaving base. And at some bases, you can find convenient Embedded Behavioral Health teams—clinics separate from traditional medical facilities. 

If you, a colleague or a family member are experiencing an immediate crisis—particularly if it’s a life-threatening mental health crisis—you should proceed immediately to a military or civilian emergency room for acute care or call 911.


Section Title: Will Asking For Mental Health Treatment Affect My Career?
Section Contents: Military personnel have always taken care of their physical health, but in today’s armed forces, mental health is equally essential to a successful career. The military has changed many of its policies in recent years to encourage better mental health. The Department of Defense acknowledges that untreated mental health conditions pose a greater safety threat than mental health conditions for which you’re seeking treatment. Under 2014 rules, talking to a doctor about your concerns, asking if you need a diagnosis or seeking treatment does not affect your career. If your doctor needs to disclose your condition, your career is not at risk from this disclosure. In addition, with changes to security clearance procedures, you no longer risk losing clearance by consulting a doctor. If you seek help for combat-related issues or receive marital counseling, you do not have to worry about “question 21” regarding treatment for mental or emotional conditions.


Section Title: The Dangers of Not Disclosing
Section Contents: Untreated mental illness can, however, damage your career. If the symptoms are severe, your commanding officer may require duty limitations or recommend separation from the military for medical reasons. Military records show that talking to a doctor is a good career move. According to a 2006 study in Military Medicine, 97% of personnel who sought mental health treatment did not experience any negative career impact. The same study showed that it’s risky to ignore a mental health condition. If it worsens, a commanding officer can require a mental health evaluation, which is much more damaging to your career. Among people who had command-directed evaluations, 39% had a negative career impact.


Section Title: Military Policy and Your Privacy
Section Contents: When you seek mental health care, your care provider will inform you that the Department of Defense follows the privacy guidelines set down by HIPAA and the Privacy Act. These guidelines ensure the privacy of your mental health records in most situations. If your care provider discovers that your mental health condition may endanger yourself, others or the mission, however, they are obligated to disclose this information to the chain of command. 

Military policy states that care providers can only share certain information and only in those situations involving safety. The precise definition of those circumstances is different for each of the branches of the armed forces. 

In the Army, for example, PHI policy states that information can only be released in situations involving an acute threat of harm to self, others or a mission; upon admission or discharge from inpatient hospitalization; when entering formal substance abuse treatment; and when enrolling in personnel reliability programs. 

If a medical officer or military care provider observes that your health condition poses a danger, the officer will share your medical profile with commanding officers. The information they are allowed to share includes your diagnosis and the medically recommended duty limitations. Unit commanders will decide what duties to assign you until your condition improves. 

You can avoid situations requiringdisclosure by discussing your concerns with providers when they first arise. Ignoring symptoms may allow them to worsen. A mental health condition may affect only you at first, but if your condition doesn’t improve, your ability to perform your duties may suffer. If commanders or supervisors observe behaviors that appear to compromise safety or job performance, they can request a command-directed behavioral health evaluation. A command-directed evaluation doesn’t guarantee as much confidentiality as a medical consultation you seek yourself.


Section Title: Veterans: Making a Strong Transition to Civilian Life
Section Contents: Returning to civilian life can be a time of joy, but also a time of emotional upheaval. Your experiences in the service may have changed the way you look at life. You may have new abilities, new friendships or new concerns. 

If you were in combat or similarly stressful situations, it’s possible some of the habits that helped you stay strong during traumatic events will be less useful in civilian life. Keeping strong in civilian life might require developing new habits. You may also be at increased risk of PTSD and other symptoms because your brain is recovering from trauma. Some veterans find they miss the structure that the military life provides. Some miss feeling a sense of purpose in their daily work. Others may feel isolated because civilians don’t understand the experience of serving. The memories of your experiences also may take time to deal with. Remember that readjusting takes time. Give yourself opportunities to maintain your physical and mental health during the transition. 

The important thing to remember is that you’re not alone. There are many people who want to support you. You can start preparing now, by looking at VA website (www.va.gov) or the MilitaryOneSource website (http://www.militaryonesource.mil) offering assistance with the transition to civilian life. If you are having thoughts of suicide, the Veterans Crisis Line is available 24/7 by dialing 1-800-273-8255 and pressing 1.

Main Section Title: Dual Diagnosis
Main Section Contents: Dual diagnosis is a term for when someone experiences a mental illness and a substance abuse problem simultaneously. Dual diagnosis is a very broad category. It can range from someone developing depression because of binge drinking, to someone’s symptoms of bipolar disorder becoming more severe when that person abuses heroin during periods of mania. 

Either substance abuse or mental illness can develop first. A person experiencing a mental health condition may turn to drugs and alcohol as a form of self-medication to improve the troubling mental health symptoms they experience. Research shows that drugs and alcohol make the symptoms of mental health conditions worse. Abusing substances can also lead to mental health problems because of the effects drugs have on a person’s moods, thoughts, brain chemistry and behavior.


Section Title: How Common is a Dual Diagnosis?
Section Contents: About one-third of all people experiencing mental illness and about one-half of people living with severe mental illness also experience substance abuse. These statistics are mirrored in the substance abuse community, where about a third of all alcohol abusers and more than half of all drug abusers report experiencing a mental illness. 

Those who have a higher risk of dual diagnosis include individuals of lower socioeconomic status, military veterans and people with more general medical illnesses.

Section Title: Symptoms
Section Contents: The defining characteristic of dual diagnosis is that both a mental health and substance abuse disorder occur simultaneously. Because there are many combinations of disorders that can occur, the symptoms of dual diagnosis vary widely. 

SubSection Title: The symptoms of substance abuse may include: 
SubSection Contents: » Withdrawal from friends and family. 
» Sudden changes in behavior. 
» Using substances under dangerous conditions. 
» Engaging in risky behaviors when drunk or high. 
» Loss of control over use of substances. 
» Doing things you wouldn’t normally do to maintain your habit. 
» Developing tolerance and withdrawal symptoms. 
» Feeling like you need the drug to be able to function.

Section Title: Treatment
Section Contents: The most common method of treatment for dual diagnosis today is integrated intervention, where a person receives care for both a specific mental illness and substance abuse. Because there are many ways in which a dual diagnosis may occur, treatment will not be the same for everyone.


Section Title:  Detoxification
Section Contents: The first major hurdle that people with dual diagnosis will have to pass is detoxification. During inpatient detoxification, a person is monitored 24/7 by a trained medical staff for up to 7 days. The staff may administer tapering amounts of the substance or its medical alternative in order to wean a person off and lessen the effects of withdrawal. 

Inpatient detoxification is generally more effective than outpatient for initial sobriety. This is because inpatient treatment provides a consistent environment and removes the person battling addiction from exposure to people and places associated with using.


Section Title: Inpatient Rehabilitation
Section Contents: A person experiencing a serious mental illness and dangerous or dependent patterns of abuse may benefit most from an inpatient rehabilitation center where they can receive concentrated medical and mental health care 24/7. These treatment centers provide them with therapy, support, medication and health services with the goal of treating their addiction and its underlying causes.


Section Title: Medications and Psychotherapy
Section Contents: Certain medications are also helpful for people experiencing substance abuse. These medications are used to help ease withdrawal symptoms or promote recovery. Medications to ease withdrawal are used during the detoxification process. They produce similar effects in the body as certain addictive drugs. Psychotherapy is almost always a large part of an effective dual diagnosis treatment plan. Education on a person’s illness and how their beliefs and behaviors influence their thoughts has been shown in countless studies to improve the symptoms of both mental illness and substance abuse. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) in particular is effective in helping people with dual diagnosis learn how to cope and to change ineffective patterns of thinking.


Main Section Title: Treating Mental Illness
Section Contents: Treatment choices for mental health conditions will vary from person to person. There is no “one size fits all” treatment. There are many tools that can improve the experience on the road to wellness: medication, counseling (therapy), social support and education are just a few of them. Therapy, for example, can take many forms, from learning relaxation skills to intensively reworking your thinking patterns. Social support, acceptance and encouragement from friends, family and others can also make a difference. Education about how to manage a mental health condition along with other medical conditions can provide the skills and supports to enrich the unique journey toward overall recovery and wellness. Together with a treatment team you can develop a well-rounded and integrated recovery plan that may include counseling, medications, support groups, education programs and other strategies that work for you.


Main Section Title: Psychotherapy
Main Section Contents: Psychotherapy, also known as “talk therapy,” is when a person speaks with a trained therapist in a safe and confidential environment to explore and understand feelings and behaviors and gain coping skills. During individual talk therapy sessions, the conversation is often led by the therapist and can touch on topics such as past or current problems, experiences, thoughts, feelings or relationships experienced by the person while the therapist helps make connections and provide insight. 

Studies have found individual psychotherapy to be effective at improving symptoms in a wide array of mental illnesses, making it both a popular and versatile treatment. It can also be used for families, couples or groups. Best practice for treating many mental health conditions includes a combination of medication and therapy.

Section Title: Types of Psychotherapy
Section Contents:

SubSection Title: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT)
SubSection Contents: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) focuses on exploring relationships among a person’s thoughts, feelings and behaviors. During CBT a therapist will actively work with a person to uncover unhealthy patterns of thought and how they may be causing self-destructive behaviors and beliefs. By addressing these patterns, the person and therapist can work together to develop constructive ways of thinking that will produce healthier behaviors and beliefs. For instance, CBT can help someone replace thoughts that lead to low self- esteem (“I can’t do anything right”) with positive expectations (“I can do this most of the time, based on my prior experiences”). 

The core principles of CBT are identifying negative or false beliefs and testing or restructuring them. Oftentimes someone being treated with CBT will have homework in between sessions where they practice replacing negative thoughts with more realistic thoughts based on prior experiences or record their negative thoughts in a journal. Studies of CBT have shown it to be an effective treatment for a wide variety of mental illnesses, including depression, anxiety disorders, bipolar disorder, eating disorders and schizophrenia. Individuals who undergo CBT show changes in brain activity, suggesting that this therapy actually improves your brain functioning as well. 

Cognitive behavioral therapy has a considerable amount of scientific data supporting its use and many mental health care professionals have training in CBT, making it both effective and accessible. However, more CBT therapists are needed to meet the public health demand.


SubSection Title: Dialectical Behavioral Therapy (DBT)
SubSection Contents: Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) was originally developed to treat chronically suicidal individuals with borderline personality disorder (BPD). Over time, DBT has been adapted to treat people with multiple different mental illnesses, but most people who are treated with DBT have BPD as a primary diagnosis. DBT is heavily based on CBT with one big exception: it emphasizes validation, or accepting uncomfortable thoughts, feelings and behaviors instead of struggling with them. By having an individual come to terms with the troubling thoughts, emotions or behaviors that they struggle with, change no longer appears impossible and they can work with their therapist to create a gradual plan for recovery. The therapist’s role in DBT is to help the person find a balance between acceptance and change. They also help the person develop new skills, like coping methods and mindfulness practices, so that the person has the power to improve unhealthy thoughts and behaviors. Similar to CBT, individuals undergoing DBT are usually instructed to practice these new methods of thinking and behaving as homework between sessions. Improving coping strategies is an essential aspect of successful DBT treatment. 

Studies have shown DBT to be effective at producing significant and long-lasting improvement for people experiencing a mental illness. It helps decrease the frequency and severity of dangerous behaviors, uses positive reinforcement to motivate change, emphasizes the individual’s strengths and helps translate the things learned in therapy to the person’s everyday life.


SubSection Title: Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing Therapy (EMDR)
SubSection Contents: EMDR is used to treat PTSD. A number of studies have shown it can reduce the emotional distress resulting from traumatic memories. EMDR replaces negative emotional reactions to difficult memories with less-charged or positive reactions or beliefs. Performing a series of back and forth, repetitive eye movements for 20-30 seconds can help individuals change these emotional reactions. 

Therapists refer to this protocol as “dual stimulation.” During the therapy, an individual stimulates the brain with back and forth eye movements (or specific sequences of tapping or musical tones). Simultaneously, the individual stimulates memories by recalling a traumatic event. There is controversy about EMDR—and whether the benefit is from the exposure inherent in the treatment or if movement is an essential aspect of the treatment.


SubSection Title: Exposure Therapy
SubSection Contents: Exposure therapy is a type of cognitive behavioral therapy that is most frequently used to treat obsessive-compulsive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder and phobias.During treatment, a person works with a therapist to identify the triggers of their anxiety and learn techniques to avoid performing rituals or becoming anxious when they are exposed to them. The person then confronts whatever triggers them in a controlled environment where they can safely practice implementing these strategies. There are two methods of exposure therapy. One presents a large amount of the triggering stimulus all at once (“flooding”) and the other presents small amounts first and escalates over time (“desensitization”). Both help the person learn how to cope with what triggers their anxiety so they can apply it to their everyday life.


SubSection Title: Interpersonal Therapy
SubSection Contents: Interpersonal therapy focuses on the relationships a person has with others, with a goal of improving the person’s interpersonal skills. In this form of psychotherapy, the therapist helps people evaluate their social interactions and recognize negative patterns, like social isolation or aggression, and ultimately helps them learn strategies for understanding and interacting positively with others. Interpersonal therapy is most often used to treat depression, but may be recommended with other mental health conditions.


SubSection Title: Mentalization-Based Therapy (MBT)
SubSection Contents: MBT can bring long-term improvement to people with borderline personality disorder (BPD), according to randomized clinical trials. MBT is a kind of psychotherapy that engages and exercises the important skill called mentalizing. Mentalizing refers to the intuitive process that gives us a sense of self. When people consciously perceive and understand their own inner feelings and thoughts, it’s mentalizing. People also use mentalizing to perceive the behavior of others and to speculate about their feelings and thoughts. Mentalizing thus plays an essential role in helping us connect with other people. 

BPD often causes feelings described as “emptiness” or “an unstable self-image.” Relationships with others tend to be unstable as well. MBT addresses this emptiness or instability by teaching skills in mentalizing. The theory behind MBT is that people with BPD have people with BPD are less able to mentalize about their own selves, leading to lower feelings of self, over-attachment to others, and difficulty empathizing with the inner lives of other people. 

In MBT, a therapist encourages a person with BPD to practice mentalizing, particularly about the current relationship with the therapist. Since people with BPD may grow attached to therapists quickly, MBT takes this attachment into account. By becoming aware of attachment feelings in a safe therapeutic context, a person with BPD can increase their ability to mentalize and learn increased empathy. 

Compared to other forms of psychotherapy such as cognitive-behavioral therapy, MBT is less structured and should typically be long-term. The technique can be carried out by non-specialist mental health practitioners in individual and group settings.


SubSection Title: Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
SubSection Contents: The goal of psychodynamic therapy is to recognize negative patterns of behavior and feeling that are rooted in past experiences and resolve them. This type of therapy often uses open-ended questions and free association so that people have the opportunity to discuss whatever is on their minds. The therapist then works with the person to sift through these thoughts and identify unconscious patterns of negative behavior or feelings and how they have been caused or influenced by past experiences and unresolved feelings. By bringing these associations to the person’s attention they can learn to overcome the unhelpful behaviors and feelings, which they caused. 

Psychodynamic therapy is often useful for treating depression, anxiety disorders, borderline personality disorder, and other mental illnesses.

SubSection Title: Therapy Pets
SubSection Contents: Spending time with domestic animals can reduce symptoms of anxiety, depression, fatigue and pain for many people. Hospitals, nursing homes and other medical facilities sometimes make use of this effect by offering therapy animals. 

Trained therapy pets accompanied by a handler can offer structured animal-assisted therapy or simply visit people to provide comfort. 

Dogs are the most popular animals to work as therapy pets, though other animals can succeed as well if they are docile and respond to training. Hospitals make use of therapy pets particularly for patients with cancer, heart disease and mental health conditions. The pets that are certified to visit medical facilities meet a high standard of training and are healthy and vaccinated. 

For people with a mental health condition, research has shown that time with pets reduces anxiety levels more than other recreational activities. Pets also provide a non-judgmental form of interaction that can motivate and encourage people, especially children. Veterans with PTSD have also found therapy pets helpful. A session with a therapy pet and its handler may focus on specific goals such as learning a skill through human-animal interaction. Alternatively, simply spending time holding a therapy pet can have benefits such as lower anxiety levels. 

Though more research is necessary to establish why animal therapy is effective, one theory is that humans evolved to be highly aware of our natural environment, including the animals around us. The sight of a calm animal reassures us that the environment is safe, thus reducing anxiety and increasing our own feelings of calm. Therapy animals are not the same as service animals, who receive a higher level of training and learn specific tasks for assisting one person on a long-term basis. Service animals are considered working animals, not pets. They have shown some promise in helping people with mental health conditions, particularly PTSD and panic disorders.


Main Section Title: Psychosocial Treatments
Main Section Contents: Psychosocial treatments include different types of psychotherapy and social and vocational training, and aim to provide support, education and guidance to people with mental illness and their families. Psychosocial treatments are an effective way to improve the quality of life for individuals with mental illness and their families. They can lead to fewer hospitalizations and less difficulties at home, at school and at work. Check with your local NAMI affiliate, your community mental health center or health care provider to see what psychosocial services are available in your community and what may be provided under your health insurance plan.


Section Title: Types of Psychosocial Treatments
Section Contents: Often called talk therapy, psychotherapy is when a person, family, couple or group sits down and talks with a therapist or other mental health provider. Psychotherapy helps people learn about their moods, thoughts, behaviors and how they influence their lives. They also provide ways to help restructure thinking and respond to stress and other conditions.


SubSection Title: Psychoeducation
SubSection Contents: Psychoeducation teaches people about their illness and how they’ll receive treatment. Psychoeducation also includes education for family and friends where they learn things like coping strategies, problem-solving skills and how to recognize the signs of relapse. Family psychoeducation can often help ease tensions at home, which can help the person experiencing the mental illness to recover. Many of NAMI’s education programs are examples of psychoeducation.


SubSection Title: Self-Help and Support Groups
SubSection Contents: Self-help and support groups can help address feelings of isolation and help people gain insight into their mental health condition. Members of support groups may share frustrations, successes, referrals for specialists, where to find the best community resources and tips on what works best when trying to recover. They also form friendships with other members of the group and help each other on the road to recovery. As with psychoeducation, families and friends may also benefit from support groups of their own.


SubSection Title: Psychosocial Rehabilitation
SubSection Contents: Psychosocial rehabilitation helps people develop the social, emotional and intellectual skills they need in order to live happily with the smallest amount of professional assistance they can manage. Psychosocial rehabilitation uses two strategies for intervention: learning coping skills so that they are more successful handling a stressful environment and developing resources that reduce future stressors. 

Treatments and resources vary from case to case but can include medication management, psychological support, family counseling, vocational and independent living training, housing, job coaching, educational aid and social support.


SubSection Title: Assertive Community Treatment (ACT)
SubSection Contents: Assertive community treatment (ACT) is a team-based treatment model that provides multidisciplinary, flexible treatment and support to people with mental illness 24/7. ACT is based around the idea that people receive better care when their mental health care providers work together. ACT team members help the person address every aspect of their life, whether it be medication, therapy, social support, employment or housing. 

ACT is mostly used for people who have transferred out of an inpatient setting but would benefit from a similar level of care and having the comfort of living a more independent life than would be possible with inpatient care. 

Studies have shown that ACT is more effective than traditional treatment for people experiencing mental illnesses such as schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder and can both reduce hospital stays and improve housing stability.


SubSection Title: Supported Employment
SubSection Contents: Supported employment improves the employment opportunities for adults with serious mental illness. Supported employment is one type of psychosocial rehabilitation (PSR). PSR includes independent living and social skills training, client psychological and social support services, family support services, access to recreational activities, housing, and vocational rehabilitation as well as supported employment services. Supported employment is the placement of individuals with mental illness in competitive employment with ongoing supports. This practice, which integrates individuals with disabilities with nondisabled people as much as possible, is very different from vocational rehabilitation programs that require assessment, skills training, vocational counseling, or sheltered work experiences that segregate people with disabilities. 

Supported employment assumes that someone with a serious mental illness, when given job support services, will gain the skills needed for successful employment on the job, just as most other adults do. Adults with serious mental illness who are placed into competitive employment and who receive ongoing supports are more likely to be successful in achieving good work outcomes than adults in traditional vocational programs. A primary distinction between supported employment and traditional vocational programs is that supported employment programs provide ongoing support to individuals after they have been hired. Traditional vocational programs do not provide ongoing help. 

Supported employment programs can be implemented from a variety of settings, including community mental health centers, community rehabilitation programs, clubhouses, and psychiatric rehabilitation centers. However, services must be provided out in the community, where there are job searches and employment opportunities. Outcomes for supported employment programs include increased levels of competitive employment, about 21 percent in traditional programs compared to 58 percent in supported employment programs. 

Work can be an essential step on the path to wellbeing and recovery, but challenges that come with mental illness can make it more difficult. There are programs, however, designed specifically to help with work readiness, searching for jobs and providing support in the workplace.


SubSection Title: Vocational Rehabilitation (VR)
SubSection Contents: VR provides career counseling and job search assistance for people with disabilities, including mental illness. VR program structures vary from state to state.


SubSection Title:  Individual Placement and Support (IPS) Supported Employment
SubSection Contents: IPS programs are evidence-based programs that help people with mental illness locate jobs that match their individual strengths and interests. Once an individual locates a job, IPS programs provide continuous support to help the person succeed in the workplace. IPS Supported Employment teams include employment specialists, health care providers and the individual with mental illness. If the individual agrees, family members or a significant other may be part of the team.


SubSection Title:  Clubhouses
SubSection Contents: Clubhouses are community-based centers open to individuals with mental illness. Clubhouse members have the opportunity to gain skills, locate a job, find housing, and pursue continuing education. Members work side-by-side with staff to make sure the program operates smoothly. Members also have the opportunity to take part in social events, classes and weekend activities.


Main Section Title: Medication
Main Section Contents: There are now many medicines prescribed to relieve symptoms of schizophrenia, depression, bipolar disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorders, anxiety, and panic disorder. 

Medications can play an important part of a treatment plan. Medicines are usually more effective when combined with psychotherapy. 

Medications may work better for one person than for another. It is difficult to predict exactly who will respond to what medication. Doctors usually review clinical records and see if there is an evidence base for recommending one type of medicine over another. Family history and side effects also come into play when prescribing medication. 

Be persistent until you find the medication or combination of medications that works for you. A few psychiatric medications work quickly and you will see improvements within days, but many work more slowly. You may need to take a medication for several weeks before you see improvement. If you feel a medication doesn’t work, or you are having side effects, consult with a provider to adjust the treatment plan. Individuals with a mental health condition should monitor their own symptoms and reactions to medication as much as possible. 

Some medications can be prescribed “off-label,” which means they haven’t been approved by the FDA for a given condition. A doctor should justify their thinking in recommending any treatment as well as be clear about the limits of the research around that medication and if there are any alternate options. 

Medication may be a short-term aid that only needs to be taken for a few months. In other cases, medication may be a long-term, or even life-long, treatment approach. Some people are afraid that taking a medication will change their personality, but most people find that treatment allows them to take charge of their personality and make decisions about treatment and their quality of life. 

Knowing the benefits and risks of all treatment decisions is crucial. NAMI has brief summaries of mental health medications provided by the College of Psychiatric and Neurologic Pharmacists available at nami.org. You can also visit medlineplus.gov, a website of the National Institute of Health.


Section Title: Types of Medication
Section Contents: Psychiatric medications work by influencing the brain chemicals regulating emotions and thought patterns. Treatment typically consists of pills or capsules taken daily. A few medications are available as liquids, injections or tablets that dissolve in the mouth. For most medications, your provider will start at a low dose and slowly increase dosages to therapeutic levels. Following these instructions will reduce side effects and discomfort. Whenever stopping a medication, it’s necessary to work with a doctor to taper off the dosage while brain chemicals get used to the change. Stopping medication abruptly can result in uncomfortable side effects. Medications for mental illness fall into the following categories:


SubSection Title: Antipsychotics
SubSection Contents: These medications reduce or eliminate the symptoms of psychosis (delusions and hallucinations) by impacting the brain chemical called dopamine. Antipsychotics play an important role in treating schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder.

Newer antipsychotics can also treat acute mania and depression in bipolar disorder and treatment-resistant depression. The antipsychotics developed in the middle of the 20th century are often referred to as first-generation or typical antipsychotics. Second-generation antipsychotics are known as atypical antipsychotics. 

Second-generation drugs aren’t necessarily better or worse than first-generation, but do have different side effects. First-generation antipsychotics are more likely to cause movement disorders. For example, tardive dyskinesia. This is an uncomfortable condition in which the brain misfires and causes random, uncontrollable muscle movements or tics. These most typically affect the arms, fingers, legs, toes or facial muscles. Second-generation antipsychotics are more likely to result in weight gain. This increase in weight to other health complications such as metabolic syndrome. The important thing is to find the medication that works best for you. 

People who have difficulty remembering to take daily pills, or people who have a history of discontinuing medication, may have better results by taking medication as a shot at the doctor’s office once or twice a month. This shot is called a long-acting injectable antipsychotic medication (LAI) and it has the same effects as medication taken in pill form.


SubSection Title: Antidepressants
SubSection Contents: These medications improve the symptoms of depression by impacting the brain chemicals associated with emotion, such as serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine. 

Newer medications, SSRIs and SNRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors), have fewer side effects than older drugs, but no medication is side-effect-free. 

Side effects of SSRIs and SNRIs include: 
» Nausea 
» Nervousness, agitation or restlessness 
» Dizziness 
» Reduced sexual desire or difficulty reaching orgasm or inability to maintain an erection 
» Drowsiness 
» Insomnia 
» Weight gain or loss 
» Headache 
» Dry mouth 
» Vomiting 
» Diarrhea 
Many people won’t experience these side effects, or will see them go away within a few weeks. But if they continue, changing medications or adjusting the dosage will often resolve the problem. 


One antidepressant (bupropion) mostly affects the brain chemical dopamine and thus forms a category of its own. Older types of antidepressants, which include tricyclics and MAOIs (monoamine oxidase inhibitors), may be prescribed by a mental health professional if newer medications do not seem to be effective. The most common side effects of tricyclics (and tetracyclics) include: 
» Dry mouth 
» Blurred vision
» Constipation 
» Urinary retention 
» Drowsiness 
» Increased appetite leading to weight gain 
» Drop in blood pressure when moving from sitting to standing, which can cause lightheadedness 
» Increased sweating 

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) are the least prescribed antidepressants because they can cause dangerously high blood pressure if combined with certain foods or medications. People taking MAOIs must watch their diets carefully to avoid potentially life-threatening complications. The foods that are off-limits include aged cheese, sauerkraut, cured meats, draft beer and fermented soy products such as miso, tofu or soy sauce. For some individuals, wine and all forms of beer may be contraindicated. 

Many antidepressants may also be useful for treating depression that is mixed with anxiety. Some antidepressants may be useful for PTSD, generalized anxiety disorder and OCD, but may require higher doses. 

Depression that is part of bipolar disorder requires more careful assessment, as antidepressants may worsen the risk of mania and provide little help for depression associated with bipolar disorder.


SubSection Title: Children and Medication
SubSection Contents: Certain medications are safe and effective for children, while others haven’t been formally researched yet. Doctors may treat children by prescribing these medications “off-label.” Questions remain about how these medications affect a child’s growing body and brain. Children may also experience different side effects than adults. Antidepressants, for instance, carry a warning that they may increase suicidal tendencies in young people. Because of these uncertainties, it’s important to monitor children and teens closely when they’re taking a medication.

SubSection Title: Seniors
SubSection Contents: As we age, our bodies process medicines more slowly, so older adults may need lower dosages. We’re also more likely to take multiple medications, increasing the risk of unexpected and dangerous drug interactions. Memory problems may cause older adults to miss doses or overdose. And certain side effects may be more common in older adults, such as tardive dyskinesia, a side effect of antipsychotics. For all these reasons, older people should pay careful attention when monitoring treatment and symptoms.


SubSection Title: Pregnancy
SubSection Contents: If you have a mental health condition and are currently pregnant, or become pregnant, you may face additional risks with medication. However, for some medicines there is not enough research to make the decision clear. 

Those who stop taking medication because of pregnancy may experience symptoms, which poses its own dangers for the parent and child. Some medications can be transmitted to the infant through the placenta or breastfeeding. You should discuss the pros and cons with your doctor. After giving birth, you should also consult your doctor about how to prevent postpartum depression and whether it’s safe resume taking your normal medications.


Main Section Title: Medication FAQs
Main Section Contents:

Section Title:
Section Contents:

SubSection Title: Does everyone who lives with mental illness have to be on medication?
SubSection Contents: » No. In some cases, the right combination of therapy and/or other supports can allow someone to feel strong in their recovery. However, many people who experience mental illnesses are very likely to need medication during their recovery. 

» If you have strong hesitations about medication or other mental health services, it may help to talk with a peer: another person who lives with mental illness.

» If you have a loved one who does not feel they need treatment, learn about peer support and seek support from other family members.


SubSection Title: Are medications addictive?
SubSection Contents: All psychiatric drugs have the potential to cause “withdrawal” reactions. You should never stop taking your medicine or change the dosage without talking to your doctor. Side effects of sudden changes can range from unpleasant to very dangerous. However, following your doctor’s instructions about dose reduction or discontinuation will reduce or eliminate the risk of withdrawal reactions. 

For information about medication and people with dual diagnoses (someone diagnosed with both a mental illness and a substance use disorder), please see the Dual Diagnosis section.


SubSection Title: Who can prescribe medication?
SubSection Contents: » Psychiatrists (MD) 
» Physicians (medical doctors and osteopathic physicians, MD and DO) 
» Advanced Practice Nurse Practitioner (APNP) 
» Physician’s assistant (PA)


SubSection Title: Do I have to be on medication forever?
SubSection Contents: Many people who live with serious mental illnesses find medication essential throughout their lives. Others do not. In many cases, the type and/or dosage may change (increase or decrease) over time. There is no “one-size-fits all” approach to medication.


SubSection Title: Can medication “cure” mental illness?
SubSection Contents: No. Psychiatric medications do not make illnesses disappear. However, they can help to make symptoms extremely manageable. Medication should be accompanied by other supports that address non-medical elements in the recovery process: self-esteem, social support, a sense of belonging and opportunities for meaningful involvement in the community.

SubSection Title: Where can I learn more about specific medications?
SubSection Contents: Visit NAMI’s website at nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Treatments for an overview of mental health medications. You can also visit medlineplus.gov, a website of the National Institute of Health.


SubSection Title: Where can I keep updated on the latest (non-pharma funded) pharmacological research?
SubSection Contents: You can visit the National Institute on Mental Health (NIMH) website for extensive reports on current research: nimh.nih.gov 

You can also visit the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website: www.fda.gov/drugs


Section Title: Tips for Medication Management 
Section Contents:

SubSection Title: Ask questions before you start taking a medication!
SubSection Contents: » What does this medication do and how will it help me? 
» What should I do if I miss a dose? 
» How will it interact with other medications and supplements? Make sure the doctor knows all medications and supplements you take (prescribed and otherwise). 
» What are the side effects and how can I manage them? 
» When should I expect a positive change? 
» Are there other ways to take this medication, such as a long-acting injection? 
» What is a possible next step if this medication is not effective? 

SubSection Title: Ask questions all the time!
SubSection Contents: » Do you feel like your doctor is listening and understanding your concerns about your medication? If not, see the “Developing a Relationship with your Provider section. 
» Does medication help you get or keep things in your life that are most important to you? 
» Does your medication ever get in the way of your life or prevent positive change from happening? 
» Are you having trouble keeping track of your medications?

Section Title: Complementary Health Approaches 
Section Contents: Traditional medical and therapeutic methods have improved over the years, but often they do not completely lessen or eliminate symptoms of mental illness. As a result, many people use complementary and alternative methods to help with recovery. These non-traditional treatments can be helpful but is important to remember that, unlike prescription medications, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not review or approve most of them. 

The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH) is the main government agency for investigating non-traditional treatments for mental illness and other conditions. “Complementary health approaches,” the term favored by NCCAM, encompasses three areas of unconventional treatment: 
» Complementary methods where non-traditional treatments are given in addition to standard medical procedures 
» Alternative methods of treatment used instead of established treatment 
» Integrative methods that combine traditional and non-traditional as part of a treatment plan


SubSection Title: Natural Products
SubSection Contents: Some people find that taking supplemental vitamins and minerals lessens the symptoms of their mental illness. There are several ways these substances may help. 

Data is still lacking on the effectiveness and safety of many complementary practices, but there are studies supporting that some of these strategies seem to have minimal, if any, adverse effects.


SubSection Title: Omega-3 Fatty Acids
SubSection Contents: Omega-3 fatty acids are group of chemicals found in a number of different foods, including fish. Studies have found that certain types of omega-3 fatty acids are useful in the management of both medical and mental illnesses. Research shows that for young people experiencing an episode of psychosis for the first time, treatment with omega-3 fatty acids may help decrease their risk of developing a more chronic and serious form of schizophrenia.


SubSection Title: Folate
SubSection Contents: Folate is a vitamin required for the human body to perform many essential processes on a day-to-day basis. Also called folic acid or vitamin B9, folate is a compound that the human body is unable to make on its own. Some people with mental illness have been shown to have low folate levels and may benefit from treatment with additional folate supplementation. At the current time, the FDA has approved only one form of folate—l-methylfolate (Deplin)—for use in the treatment of depression and schizophrenia. L-methylfolate has not been approved as a primary treatment, but rather as an additional form of treatment.


SubSection Title: Medical Foods
SubSection Contents: Medical foods are another type of product containing natural ingredients. These are foods made with or without specific nutrients to help treat a health condition. For example, gluten-free foods are designed to give people with celiac disease the nutrients they need but without the gluten which makes them sick. Like supplements, medical foods are not as closely monitored by the FDA as prescription medicines.


SubSection Title:  Mind & Body Treatments
SubSection Contents: Some types of mind and body treatments are: 
» Exercise 
» Mindfulness activities 
» Meditative movement 
Mind and body treatments can improve mood, anxiety and other symptoms of mental illness. In addition, physical activity can help reduce weight gain, fatigue, and other side effects of many conventional medicines used to treat mental health conditions.


SubSection Title: Equine Therapy
SubSection Contents: Equine therapy, or equine-assisted psychotherapy (EAP), is a form of animal-assisted therapy that teaches individuals how to groom, care for and ride horses. The goal of equine therapy is to use experience with horses to improve emotional and behavioral outcomes. 

Small studies and anecdotal evidence have shown equine therapy can help reduce symptoms of anxiety, depression and impulsiveness common to many mental health conditions. However, more data is needed to test its effectiveness. 

A licensed equine therapy program is led by a mental health professional, who guides participants in reflecting on their relationship with the horse. Because horses live in herds and are prey to larger animals in the wild, they’re highly sensitive to the emotions and behavior of others, including humans.


SubSection Title: Make Sure to Check with your Doctor
SubSection Contents: Even simple vitamins can interact with medication. While something may be safe to use with one prescription medicine, it can make others less effective or toxic. Also, any new exercise or outdoor activity should be discussed with a doctor. People taking certain medicines for depression, schizophrenia or other illnesses should make sure to stay cool and drink enough water to avoid heat stroke. Other medicines may cause a drop in body temperature, so special preparation may be needed for cold weather.


Main Section Title: Developing a Relationship with your Provider
Main Section Contents:

Section Title: Issues to Consider when Choosing a Provider
Section Contents: 1) GENDER, AGE, CULTURAL BACKGROUND, SEXUAL ORIENTATION/IDENTITY, ETC. Do you have strong preferences about these characteristics? 
2) RESPECT & EMPATHY: A good mental health care provider should make you feel like they are on your side, truly listening to your input and seeing you as an equal. If you do not feel this, especially after several meetings, talk to them about it in a direct, and respectful way. You deserve to feel heard and respected. 
3) FAMILY MEMBER INPUT: Does the provider have experience with and see value in meeting with family members? Do they respect your preferences in this regard? 
4) TRAINING AND SPECIALIZATION: With what kinds of issues is your provider most experienced? For example, some providers specialize in certain diagnoses (including substance use), behaviors or age groups.


Section Title: Tips for Developing an Effective Partnership
Section Contents: COMMUNICATE GOALS AND EXPECTATIONS. Of course, we all want to feel better. But the more specific you can be, the more your provider can help. 
DESCRIBE PAST EXPERIENCES. If you have had an especially positive OR negative experience with mental health services, try to describe what did or did not work and what you did or did not like. Don’t be afraid to express your preferences! Your provider will not be offended. Examples: therapeutic strategies, focus areas, general style, mannerisms, etc. 
BE HONEST AND OPEN. It takes time to be open and honest with a provider. Some people feel comfortable sharing everything right away, others may take multiple meetings. If you want to share but can’t, let your provider know. Together, you can explore possible reasons and solutions. 
ADDRESS PROBLEMS. If you feel overwhelmed, like you’re not making progress or you’re dreading meeting with your provider, talk to your provider about it. An open discussion can build trust and give your provider a better understanding of your needs and preferences. 
TRUST YOUR GUT. Even if the provider looks great on paper, if the connection doesn’t feel right and you have expressed your concerns and nothing has changed—go with another choice, if you can. The provider will respect this choice and should never make you feel guilty. 
KEEP AN EYE ON PROGRESS. Mental health services are rarely a quick fix and there will be times when you’ll feel challenged. Nonetheless, mental health services should be helpful over time. Some questions to ask yourself if you aren’t sure if therapy is helping: 
» Is one or more area of your life changing for the better? (work, family, social life, etc.) 
» Is therapy stretching you beyond your comfort zone? 
» Do you feel like you’re starting to understand yourself better? 
» Do you feel more confident and empowered? 
» Are your relationships with people improving?


Section Title: Marginalization in the Mental Health System
Section Contents: Trust is paramount when it comes to treatment, mental health and your well-being. It’s important to feel comfortable with your provider. While today, the climate of our culture is moving towards acceptance, intolerance and mistreatment toward marginalized groups is still present and can lead to higher rates of mental health issues for some people and can often leave individuals uncomfortable when it comes to seeking health care. With our health systems largely centered on the experiences and needs of white communities, cisgender people, and straight people, there are additional challenges for people who are part of marginalized groups.


Section Title: Black, Indigenous and People of Color (BIPOC) Communities
Section Contents: A person’s beliefs, norms, values and language affect how we perceive and experience mental health conditions. Experiencing racism – whether directly (e.g. microaggressions) or indirectly (e.g. lack of access to resources due to structural bias) – negatively impacts mental health conditions. The cultural awareness and competence of providers directly impacts access to mental health care for BIPOC communities. When providers do not have experience with and sensitivity to the cultural framework and needs of the people they serve, it increases barriers and compounds problems like stigma and misinformation about mental health conditions and treatments. As a result, people of color often receive poorer quality care due to lack of cultural competence, racism, and implicit bias. This results in misdiagnosis, dropping out of care, and a longer time to achieve recovery. When a mental health professional takes into account cultural needs and differences, outcomes for BIPOC are significantly improved.


Section Title: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Queer (LGBTQ+) Communities
Section Contents: People in LGBTQ+ communities face additional challenges when it comes to living with a mental health condition. Historically, in the U.S., LGBTQ+ people have experienced discrimination, both in and outside of health care settings, and at times even within their own community. Prejudice, abuse, violent attacks, bullying and even legislation have affected members of the various LGBTQ+ groups, sometimes in very negative ways. It’s important to remember there are big differences between people who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual and/or are unsure of their gender or sexuality. Every person’s experience is unique—no two are alike. Each group and individual faces specific challenges.


Section Title:  Queer and Trans People of Color (QTPOC) Communities
Section Contents: Queer and Trans People of Color (QTPOC) face an additional layer of challenges than their BIPOC-only or white LGBTQ+ counterparts as they navigate the mental health system with multiple marginalized identities. QTPOC have disproportionally higher rates of mental health concerns and suicide attempts than their white LGBTQ+ counterparts. It’s important to remember the compounded challenges that people face when their race interacts with their other identities and honor their unique stories.

Section Title: Finding a LGBTQ+-Friendly Provider
Section Contents: Finding an LGBTQ+ identified provider, or one that has experience specific to your situation, can go a long with way in making your treatment successful.

SubSection Title: Here are some additional tools and tips:
SubSection Contents: » Find a list of inclusive providers at the Gay and Lesbian Medical Association’s Provider Directory. 
» Check out the Healthcare Equality Index to find the LGBTQ+ inclusive policies of organization leaders in healthcare. 
» Review resources on the rights and experiences of LGBTQ+ people in mental health care, including the Center for American Progress and the National Transgender Discrimination Survey. 
» Call ahead and ask if a provider has any or has worked with LGBTQ+ clients. 
» If you are uncomfortable about being open with your provider, bring a trusted friend or family member with you to your appointment. 
» QTPOC can search the National Queer & Trans Therapists of Color Network Directory to find a QTPOC therapist in their area.

Section Title: For Providers Working with Marginalized Communities
Section Contents:  Therapists, especially those who are not part of marginalized groups, should recognize how their attitudes and knowledge about marginalized communities are relevant to assessment and treatment, seek consultation if they feel biased or unequipped, understand the ways in which stigma affects the mental health and well-being of marginalized individuals, and understand how prejudice may affect a client’s presentation of symptoms and the therapeutic process. Listening to the ways in which discrimination is affecting a client’s life can help guide their treatment and improve outcomes. 

Therapists working with LGBTQ+ clients are also encouraged to recognize the importance of relationships, understand the challenges faced by LGBTQ+ parents, recognize that family may be defined in a broader sense than legal or biological relatives, and understand that a client’s sexual orientation may have an impact on relationships within the family of origin. Providers who lack knowledge and experience working with members of LGBTQ+ communities may inappropriately link a client’s mental health condition to their sexual orientation or gender identity. These APA guidelines can help mental health providers provide the proper care to people in LGBTQ+ communities. 

Therapists need regular continuing education to stay up-to-date on best practices for working with marginalized communities. Providers should pay special attention to how they can provide relevant and culturally informed care, staying up to date on current research and actively seeking education about the perspectives and challenges of the populations they serve.


Main Section Title: Working with your Providers
Main Section Contents: No matter what type of mental health services work best for you or your loved one, knowing how to work with the people who provide mental health care is essential. 

Here’s a few tips for people living with mental health conditions (this page) and family members (opposite page) to have productive relationships with mental health professionals. 

DON’T BE AFRAID to express your preferences. You should never feel like your opinion is unimportant—you are the expert on your experience. Bring a family member, partner or friend to the appointment to be your ally, advocate and a second set of ears. If you need written instructions, request them. If you are being discharged from an inpatient (hospital) stay, keep in mind that you have the right to important services before you leave: 
» Assistance in securing appropriate housing 
» Applying for appropriate benefits 
» Obtaining community services If you feel too intimidated, confused or tired to ask all your questions, ask if you can follow up later. Or request an information release so that a loved one can follow up for you.


Section Title: Tips for Everyone!
Section Contents: ASK QUESTIONS and if you don’t understand the answer, don’t just let it go. Ask your provider to repeat the information or explain it differently. Do this until you TRULY understand. 

ASK ABOUT “PERSON-CENTERED” CARE. Does the provider value person-centered care? How will they ensure that their work with you is person-centered? 

Main Section Title: Working with a Loved One’s Providers
Main Section Contents: Understand that your involvement has limitations due to privacy laws. Generally, adults need to sign a “release of information” to allow providers to speak with family/friends. However, there are exceptions to this rule. Learn more at hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/special/mhguidance.html 
Your loved one can request an information release AT ANY POINT during their care. If you are involved in your loved one’s care (they have signed an information release), keep them informed about any communication you have with their providers. 
YOU CAN SHARE INFORMATION that you believe will benefit your loved one’s care at any time. You might say: “I know you can’t share information with me, but as a family member, I have important information to share with you. I think you should be aware that__________.” 
The therapist can choose to tell your loved one that you shared information about them. 
DON’T ASSUME that providers will not want to partner with you. Many providers feel that it is good practice to work with well-meaning, calm family members. 
Do not “vent” to providers about your loved one. Instead, get connected with NAMI family support groups or consider finding a therapist of your own. MANY family members do this.


Section Title: Tips for everyone!
Section Contents: REPORT BACK YOUR UNDERSTANDING “What I’m hearing is_____. Is that correct?” “As I understand it, you mean_________.” 

MAKE A LIST of your top questions/ideas and bring it to the appointment (find a sample appointment prep sheet in the Sample Tools section). 

MAKE SURE YOU HAVE COPIES of any document that seems important or official-looking. Keep these documents in one place. 

“Mental health professionals are people too, and respond well to encouragement, guidance and patience.” —Psychiatrist
